Documentation: data warehouse schema (#1204)
alphagov/content-performance-manager: doc/data-warehouse-schema.md

            - [Daily metrics: table `facts_metrics`](#daily-metrics-table-factsmetrics)
            - [Facts Editions: table `facts_editions`](#facts-editions-table-factseditions)
        - [Dimensions](#dimensions)
            - [Editions dimension](#editions-dimension)
            - [Dates dimension](#dates-dimension)
        - [Aggregations](#aggregations)
            - [Monthly aggregations](#monthly-aggregations)
                - [Monthly metrics: table `monthly_metrics`](#monthly-metrics-table-monthlymetrics)
                - [Month dimension: table `month_dimensions`](#month-dimension-table-monthdimensions)
                - [Benefits](#benefits)
                - [Drawbacks](#drawbacks)

<!-- markdown-toc end -->

# Data warehouse schema

This document describes the database schema for the data warehouse. This is
technical documentation so it is recommended to read first [what is a data
wareouse and why GOV.UK uses one][data-warehouse-what-why] in order to get a
better understanding of the problem that the data warehouse aims to solve.

## ERD - schema ##

The image below represents the schema for the data warehouse. There are not many

> tables but some of them are quite big. It is imporant to understand their

Author: The image below represents the schema for the data warehouse. There are not many
tables but _**some of them contains a big number of rows.**_ It is imporant to
understand their associations and the type of data that each table stores.

associations and the type of data that each table stores.

![data warehouse Database Schema][database-schema-image]

### How to generate the schema ###

The schema is generated using [Rails ERD][rails-erd] running the following
command:

```bash
$ bundle exec erd --filetype=png --connected --title 'Schema' --filename doc/images/schema
```

*Developer note*: The schema might not be an exact representation of the latest
version of the schema, but it should be close enough to get an understanding of
it.

## Introduction

Data warehouses use a different design from standard operational databases. The
latter are optimized to maintain strict accuracy of data by updating real-time
information. Data warehouses, by contrast, are designed to give a long-range
view of data over time. They trade off transaction volume and instead specialize
in data aggregation.

The data warehouse for GOV.UK stores data collected from other systems
([Feedex][feedex], [Google Analytics][google analytics], ...) which are mostly
backed by operational databases and stores this information using a `star

> schema` database design.

Reviewer: The point being made by this paragraph needs to be clearer.

"which are mostly backed by operational databases" - I don't think the reader should have to worry about this and it just adds confusion. 

"stores this information using a `star schema` database design" - this is the first reference to `star schema`, which feels overlooked.

Maybe less confusing to separate the following points:
- The data warehouse uses a star schema and this is a brief description of what it is
- The data warehouse populates its tables used a variety of different sources.

Author: I had added references to `start schema` when we talk about the new database design, and split both points.

```
The star schema consists of one or more fact tables referencing any number of
dimension tables; it separates data into `facts` and `dimensions`:
```

### Facts tables ###

A fact table is the central table in a star schema of a data warehouse. A fact
table stores quantitative information for analysis and is often denormalized.

```
Record meassurements or metrics for specific events. They usually consist of
numeric values and foreign keys to dimensional data.
```

A fact table consists of two types of columns (foreign keys and meassures).

The **foreign keys** column allows joins with dimension tables, and the
**measures** columns contain the data that is being analyzed.

> In GOV.UK the facts tables stores metrics about content. These metrics are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the data warehouse facts tables store metrics about content. These metrics are
```

collected on a daily basis or with each content change.

### Dimensional tables ###

Define facts characteristics, and usually have a relatively small number of
records, compared with the facts tables, but higher number of attributes
(columns) for filtering and grouping.

```
Categorizes facts and measures to enable users to answer business questions.

> ```

Reviewer: Example columns for dimensions and facts tables may help these sections.

Author: There are some samples below, when I talk in more detail about each table.

> ## Star Schema for GOV.UK ##

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Star Schema for Data Warehouse ##
```

### Intro  ###

At a high level, we have the following technical requirements:

1. Store performance metrics on a daily basis for each GOV.UK content item.
1. Store content quality metrics each time a content item is updated or created.
1. Store the exact version of the content item that is linked to a metric.

#### Questions to answer with the schema ####

> The database schema for GOV.UK should provide efficient ways to answer the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The database schema should provide efficient ways to answer the
```

following questions:

1. List **all the content items** from **HMRC** that had no visits for the
   **last 3 months**.

> 1. Which are the **organisations** with **less satisfaction score**?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Which **organisations** have the **lowest satisfaction score**?
```

> 1. What are the **guides** that take **more time to read**?.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Which **guides** take the **most time to read**?.
```

1. **What formats** have a **high number of PDFs** attachments?
1. List **all the editions for a content item** and the **number of unique

>    visits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   visits.**
```

> 1. What is the **relationship between user satisfaction and reading age** for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. What is the **relationship between user satisfaction and reading time**?
```

   **long documents**.

#### Patterns of all questions ####

All the questions or requests listed abover follow a similar pattern:

1. Filter content items by content characteristics.
1. Select metrics that are interesting.
1. Apply a filter to the metrics.
1. Decide grouping criteria.
1. Select time range.

### Design: Fact tables

Based on the patterns listed above, we have decided to use two facts tables: one
to track performance metrics (`facts_metrics`) and another one to track content
quality metrics (`facts_editions`). The reason for breaking the metrics in two

> tables is that they are not tracked at the same interval of times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tables is that they are updated with different frequency. Performance metrics are updated daily, whereas quality metrics are only updated as new editions are published.
```

collected from external systems like [Feedex][feedex] or [Google
Analytics][google analytics].

#### Facts Editions: table `facts_editions` ####

```
Stores content metrics for each version of a content item. It is updated each
time a content item is modified or created.
```

| metric name  | source                        |
|--------------|-------------------------------|
| pdf_count    | Number of pdf attachments     |
| word_count   | Number of word attachments    |
| reading_time | Reading time for page content |
| words        | Number of words               |

For each update or creation of a content item we have a new entry in the
`facts_edition` table so we track the exact version of the content item attached
to the metrics.

### Dimensions

Dimensions provide contextual information to Facts tables. They are usually
referenced from the facts tables via a foreign key: `many-to-one` association.

#### Editions dimension

```
Contains the attributes of the content item and it is updated each time a new
edition is published.
```

Each time a content item is updated or edited (via
[publishing-api][publishing-api]), a new edition is created in the data

> warehouse. This way we know exactly what changed in each one of the editions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
warehouse. This way we can track changes to content
```

> within the data warehouse and we have key information attached to each one of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
within the data warehouse and metrics associated with each edition
```
Not quite sure what this sentence is trying to say?

the metrics.

> Some of the most important attributes are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Important attributes of the dimension editions table are:
```

It is important to understand the grain of the data warehouse. We are not
storing metrics at a content item level, but at a base_path level (page level).
This is due to the existence of some content items, like guides, that share the
same content id for muliple pages.

Please, read the following ADRs to get additional information.

1. [Track collected metrics by base_path][adr-track-metrics-by-base-path]
1. [Track attribute changes by base_path][adr-track-content-changes-per-base-path]
1. [Convention for unique warehoue identifier][adr-warehouse-item-id]

#### Dates dimension

```
Contains date attributes that are used to add time context to metrics and
editions.
```

All metrics and editions needs time to be complete, because:

1. Each metric has a **foreign key to the day** the meassure was collected.
1. Each edition has a **foreign key to the day** the edition was created.

You can also observe that we have other attributes in the dimension (year,
week, month...), these attributes are used to enable grouping and aggregations;
This is a common practices in data warehouses.

### Aggregations

 Aggregations are a common practice in data warehouses. There is no simpler way

>  to speed up queries than aggregating data.

Reviewer: indent?

> Usually aggregations are applied to facts tables. In our case, we are creating

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually aggregations are created from fact tables. In our case, we are creating
```

> monthly aggregations for the facts metrics table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
monthly aggregations from facts metrics table.
```

#### Monthly aggregations ####

There are two tables involved in montly aggregations:

##### Monthly metrics: table `monthly_metrics` #####

```
Stores the sum of all aggregable metrics in a month. It also stores the
aggregation for the current month.
```

On a daily basis, the system will update the aggregations for the current month,
creating a new entry at the beginning of each month.

##### Month dimension: table `month_dimensions` #####

```
Contains all the months to current day. It is updated automatically each month.
```

We reference each metric in the aggregations table to the month in which it was

> collected (via a foreighn key to the monthly dimensions table).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
collected (via a foreign key to the monthly dimensions table).
```

##### Benefits  #####

The improvement in performance is substantial. Let's see the difference in
nunber of rows performing a simple calculation: Total number of unique pageviews
in a year for HMRC:

* **With no aggregation**:

```

> 80K Editions x 365 days = 29.200.000 rows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
80,000 editions x 365 days = 29,200,000 rows
```

```

* **With no aggregation**:

```

> 80K Editions x 12 days = 960.000  rows

Reviewer: ```suggestion
80,000 editions x 12 days = 960,000 rows
```

```

> The aggregations is decreasing the query time in around 30 times. For example,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aggregations result in a 30x decrease in the number of rows needed to be queried. For example,
```
(query time is not always directly proportional to number of rows)

if the query on the facts table takes 60 seconds, running the same query on the
aggregated table would take around 2 seconds.

##### Drawbacks

We should not create aggregations just to improve a query. Aggregations add
complexity to the data warehouse and can be a source for bugs. Before creating
new aggregations we would need to think about:

1. How frequently do we use the Aggregation.

> 1. Who is the user of the information. Is he able to wait a bit more if he only

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Who is the user of the information? Is longer query latency acceptable for queries that only run occasionally?
```

Reviewer: Side note: try to avoid gendered pronouns/nouns. e.g "Is he able to wait" -> "Are they able to wait"
